Colonel Wilcox, I'd like you to start off just
telling me a little bit about your military
history. And I guess it began with the Aggie Corps?
Right. I graduated from Curran High School here in
Galveston in 54 and went to Texas A&M and graduated
from Texas A&M in 1958
with a degree in marketing and insurance and Also
at that time, I was in the Corps of Cadets, and I
became a second lieutenant of infantry upon
graduation, and then went to Fort Benning,
Georgia for the basic officer's course. Okay. Now
to start talking about exactly what you did in
Vietnam. On your first tour, could you describe
briefly your responsibilities and position in
your first tour? Okay. The first time I was over
there was April of 1967. through April of 1968,
which was part of the Tet Offensive of 1968 in
Vietnam.
The first time I was an advisor to a Arvin
battalion, a senior advisor to a battalion. It was
myself and a sergeant. And we two was the entire
American forces with about 2,500 men Battalion,
which had the responsibility to guard a American
and Vietnamese Air Force Base, which was called
Tan Son Nuc. Tan Son Nuc Air Force Base was in or
outside of Saigon. Also, this battalion, a
Vietnamese battalion, was responsible for not
only guarding this outer belt of the Tan Son Nuc Air
Force Base, but it had the responsibility to guard
the training center which was located in the area
on the outer belt of the Air Force Base. This
training center does the same thing as an American
training center does. It trains individuals in
about eight weeks from a ROAR recruit to a fighting
soldier that goes out and takes his place in a
normal battalion. ROAR goes on to some advanced
training such as the airborne Ranger-type
training. My job there was to be an advisor, only
advisor, to the battalion commander that was in
charge of the security for that area. And I had no
role in command. As advisor, our sole purpose was
to try to advise the Vietnamese counterpart, in
this case he was a major and I was also at that time,
on some of the tactics to be successful. Also, we
were available since we had American units
backing us up from the standpoint that we were in
communication with American units. We could call
upon American artillery fire with his approval,
and we could call upon American gunships to come
in, which are helicopters, to come in and support
us if they were available and if he wanted them
after We were nicely trying to talk him into using
these things. So we were there to provide advice
and also to provide fire support to him if he wanted
to. As a senior advisor to the Army Battalion at
Saigon, what types of fighting tactics were
taught? Well, our battalion, and I say our because
I felt like I was a part of the battalion, we were a
security unit, and we put out patrols at night. up
patrols during the day to ambush any infiltrators
that may be coming in also to provide security at
the main intersections within the training site
training site was about two and a half miles oh
about two and a half miles wide maybe about three
miles long it covered a live fire training range
and some of the tactical maneuver training
grounds that they had out there and for the most
part everything was done to provide security to
keep the Viet Cong which were somewhere in the area
or the North Vietnamese regular battalions out of
the area so they wouldn't attack the train
training outfits while they were trying to train
and then I say we also had an additional mission to
provide security for the American-Vietnamese
Air Force Base, which was located in Saigon and
Tanzania. Okay. What exactly was the difference,
I was just wondering, the official relationship
between this earlier phase of the war when we were
advisors, you were an advisor, and to later when
they were commanders? Well, this goes back, oh, in
around the 60s, 60 to 62 or so. when the Americans
went in under the auspices of a military advisory
group and we in fact only advised and did not in fact
get into combat we went with them we were not
supposed to fire at that time but that wasn't the
situation when I was there when I was there we had
advisors who protected themselves and were in
combat but were advisors. But we also had regular
American units that were there fighting. In my
case, on this first tour, I was there as an advisor.
I did fire when I was fired upon. An officer who's
trying to advise can't really get into the front
line tactics and act as a rifleman when he's back
there with the commander trying to advise from an
advantage point. The second time when I went over
this area, I was with an American battalion, or
actually American Division 101st Airborne,
which was in fact engaged with the enemy, and we
weren't advising anybody. We were just fighting.
Why do the Arvin troops need such intense training
in light of their familiarity with their own
country and the grill of fighting that they've
been associated with since the 1930s? Again, I'm
going to have to give you some of my opinions on it.
From what I could see, the orphan battalions were
not well equipped. When I was there in 67, when I
first got there, they had a lot of old, obsolete
arms. You're probably not familiar with what I'm
going to say, but back, oh, about 1950s, we had in
our training sites what we called water-cooled
machine guns. which was a five-gallon can of water
attached to a rubber hose that cooled the machine
gun down so it would not burn the barrels up when you
fired them on a training range. They had these
weapons in actual combat. The Americans had
washed them out of their system 10, 15, 20 years
before that. They had a lot of old World War II arms,
carbines that the Americans were not using at all.
Our government was trying to upgrade their
weaponry with the new m16 rifles the automatic
rifles and we were sent in to advise them how to use
these weapons and i would say we were there to try to
teach them how to do it the american way even though
we a lot of talk was said that well we were just
trying to help them and advance
their training we were really in fact trying to
show them how to do it the american way so that We
thought our way was the best.
How did the tradition of the Arvin families
following their husbands into combat locations
affect their attitudes? I didn't see too much of
that. The battalion I was with worked out of a
location. We did not really move from that area. We
had the responsibility for, I say, the outer belt
of the Tonsenuk. We had the responsibility for the
training center. And we didn't go from place to
place to place like some other battalions did. The
family was there. And I might digress a second
here. I knew a major who was in the Vietnamese Army
who was other than the one I was advising. And we
talked about sometimes
on Sunday afternoons, you would think that there
was no war going on at all, that they would be in
civilian clothes. And it would seem like that
nobody would attack us or we wouldn't attack
anybody on Sundays. I'm talking when I was with the
Army Battalion now, Republic of Vietnam. And they
said, well, you know, you people come over here, I
mean Americans, and you fight for a year and you go
home to your family. He said, we live this day in and
day out, seven days a week. So on Sunday
afternoons, if we don't have any problems, then we
kind of relax. And it was kind of an unwritten law
that the, Sunday afternoons, it was pretty
peaceful.
How significant was, although this may not apply
to your position now, but how significant was
Arvin's desertion in combat? How committed were
the men in training? Well, I felt that the training
that they received was as good as the people they
had trained them. That if you had a good, strong
commander, who was really pushing at him and
getting the job done, then the soldiers under him
were doing the same thing. You have to kind of look
at how the Vietnamese Army recruited. Much
different than the recruitment of the American
Army. In the American Army, you'll be called up or
you'll go down and volunteer and say, I want to
join. But in the Vietnamese Army, that's not the
way it works. Not all the time. They'll run a
patrol. down through a town and any individual
they catch who fits between a certain age bracket
that particular day they will put in a two and a half
ton truck which is a truck they use and bring one out
to training i mean they they might be going to
church and lo and behold their next day they're
training at a training center and their family is
left and don't know what happened to them or
anything else until they finally write them and
say hey i just got drafted so they had a very
peculiar way of drafting by just going out and
grabbing me off the street. And in some cases, and
we've done it in our army too, unwritten I guess, a
guy gets in trouble with the police and the police
says, well, we won't press charges if you go down
and enlist. So the guy goes down and enlists so he
doesn't go to jail or do other things. And this has
happened a few times you've probably heard about
in our own army. Now I'd like to turn the interview
over to the Tet Offensive in 1968. You're a very
prominent part of this since you were an actual
observer. Maybe you could describe the events of
the day, the day of the attack on Saigon. What were
your initial thoughts when it occurred? Well, I
had just got back from R&R. Actually, R&R is Arrest
and Recuperation. The American forces were given
six days.
Let me think now. I think it was two weeks, I'm
sorry. And at that time, you could travel anywhere
you wanted. So I went to Hawaii and got back about
two weeks before the Tet Offensive. And it was kind
of peaceful and quiet. And I had sat down and talked
with my counterpart, which we called our
individual we were giving advice to. And my
sergeant was there. And we had gone over a few
things which could have happened. And generally,
the attacks, every year is Tet. They have this
ceremony every year. And every year, you
generally didn't have too much problem where we
were. We were in Saigon, which was the capital of
Vietnam at that time. And people generally would
have their wars out in the rice farms areas. And
Saigon would generally be pretty quiet, and
nobody would bother anybody. Maybe there's a few
shootings on the street, but Otherwise, it was
kind of a quiet, peaceful area. So we had been
talking about it, and the Viennese commander I
talked to had decided that he felt, based on
reports that he was receiving through his
intelligence, that there may be some kind of
offensive in the Saigon area. So he wasn't going to
put as many troops out on vacation. And Tet
offensive, I mean, Tet is like christmas for us so
he decided he wasn't going to put as many out and
that the training center commander and you
remember we were talking about two different
people we're a security force for a training
center but we also had a general guinea general
that was in charge of the training center and so
they decided they weren't going to put as many
people on vacation to include the trainees uh as
they had before because they felt that something
was going to happen how they got this source i don't
really know because i wasn't getting that much
source from my own american side of the house they
felt yeah there's going to be something going on
but they didn't expect what we'd get into from the
standpoint of i didn't know about what we were
going to get into i don't know if anybody else did
but so we were ready somewhat for what was going on
we had plenty of ammunition we'd all always been
pretty well prepared for anything because the VC,
now VC is an individual who is a civilian by day and a
soldier by night. He's not really a North
Vietnamese Viet Cong type. He's a South
Vietnamese soldier for the North Vietnam. You
understand all that? So he's, we fell through some
sources and we had been picking up information.
We've been picking up some caches of arms that
something was going to happen. Didn't know how big
it was going to be. So we had reinforced a lot of
areas where there were main routes in the area. We
had two main highways leading in to Saigon that
came right through our training center, which was
one was Highway 13 and Highway 1. And we had already
built long ago brick strongholds or pillboxes, if
you want to call it that, and we'd already had these
things with sandbags and what have you. So we put
more ammunition in. We put additional firepower.
We were using .50 caliber machine guns we put in
there. We had put in, and this is all Vietnamese
stuff, and I say when I say we, they, had beefed it
up, put additional personnel, tried to improve
some of the communications to them so we knew what
was going on. And the Knight of Tet, We kind of
lucked out. The first round that they fired on us
was a RKG round, which is something like a bazooka
round. And they fired that at the main bunker
leading through Highway 13, I believe it was. And
the rocket hit a cement pillar instead of hitting
the bunker. Now, these RPGs they used could go
through a tank. It hit the bunker... a pillow,
which is a cement pillow, to the side of the bunker,
not the bunker itself, which pretty well got
everybody awake when those things hit. They then
saw, they, meaning the South Vietnamese, saw
where the round had came from, so they fired back a
50-caliber machine gun and what have you, and it
was down a kind of a ditch-like on the side of the
road. And they had caught the VCs and, in this case,
North Vietnamese soldiers by surprise. and uh
well we had three days of good fighting that time i
say good fighting i mean real close in fighting we
killed 97 of them and captured about three
truckloads of equipment and we lost seven of our
own uh no americans but just seven of our own now
this is just our battalion other things are going
on around us in other zones that was unbelievable
but uh I think for the response that we had from this
particular bunker area and them missing the
bunker area with the first shot really kind of
turned the tide for us.
Did you consider it an American victory at the
time? You mean of our little thing going on there or
just the whole Tet offensive? Right, the whole
Tet, I think. It's hard for me to say American
victory because I was working with the
Vietnamese. I felt they did a real good job in
repulsing the attacks.
We had lost a lot when they got in. Everybody was
shaking their heads how they could infiltrate and
get into Saigon.
The roads were always being checked. Buses and
what have you were being checked, and different
types of trucks and what have you being checked.
But when this offensive took effect, it seems like
the North Vietnamese and the VCs were everywhere,
behind us, around us, front of us, left and right.
And a lot of questions were asked. I know General
Westmoreland, the American general, had a lot of
questions for his staff on how could all these
people get in to Saigon without somebody finding
out about it. And I don't know if that was ever
answered. But I personally didn't think it was a
victory from the standpoint of them getting in. I
thought it was a victory from the standpoint of us
repulsing them after they had got in. But no, I
think we should have had better security, both
American and Vietnamese side, so that they
wouldn't have got in to start with.
Even though we still, well, We killed so many of the
Viet Cong, almost 15,000. Do you see it as a
psychological victory for the enemy?
Psychological victory for the enemy. Well, no,
not really. I feel really that, in personal
opinion again, not any official government
opinion, but my opinion, is that We really didn't
win a thing. We went over there, we fought, we
bombed, we advised. But when you do this and you
don't go to the source of the problem, in the early
stages of the war, we could not cross over to
Cambodia and fight. We could not bomb in Cambodia.
We could not fire across the border in Cambodia
because we were more than given the authority by
our government or whatever president might be in
power at that time uh you couldn't carry the war to
north vietnam nobody wanted to go across from
south to north and attack them we wasn't bombing
north vietnam they were using ho chi minh trail to
bring equipment down then some of our presidents
decide well yes okay let's go ahead and do that we
did that my personal opinion is that if we wanted to
end that war we could have won it and ended in 30 days
by turning loose the united states air force the
Strategic Air Command or any of the other big
powers that we have and wipe North Vietnam off the
map if we wanted to. But again here, I'm sure that
people higher than I was was concerned that if we
did take North Vietnam out or Red China, we would
have probably got into a bigger, more wider-scale
war. And I think they were really—we were really
putting out brush fires when the the Red Chinese
and the North Vietnamese were kind of sitting back
and not getting the full brunt of anything. We were
fighting in South Vietnam for quite a long time.
Our presence then, yeah, okay, did decide, and I
think the 101st went in, and I'm not sure of this,
and the 1st Division went across the border into
Cambodia, and we did do some bombing in the north,
quite a bit of bombing if you're seen James
Fonder's stories. But then
we didn't continue with it. We did it for a while,
and the public opinion got upset, and all those
other things went on. We stopped, and they built
back up again, and here we were fighting in the
South again. How did the military measure
progress? Which one? The New Year's of the
Americans. Well,
I think the only progress you could see was your
daily reports of the ratio between how many we
killed and how many we got killed. The Vietnamese
War or the war at that time, whether you were in
Cambodia or North Vietnam, wherever it may be that
they were fighting at, there was no front lines
like in World War II. You couldn't measure on the
ground. One day you might own it, that night he owns
it. There was nothing that could say, okay, on this
parallel, 38th parallel, this is all ours behind
us and that's all theirs in front. The only thing
you could really measure in is how much equipment
you captured, how much you blew up, how many people
you killed, how many people you lost, that you got
wounded, that you got your own people that got
killed. Not necessarily this time, but any time
during your tours, were you aware of the so-called
statistical juggling in body counts, kill
ratios, and lost equipment? No, I never heard
anything about that until after I got back from
Vietnam, even the second time. I do know that we
reported everything that we killed. We may have
not reported everything that we had captured. uh
we kept some of the stuff back for ourselves
everything that that you capture uh had to be
turned in and in some cases we captured american
equipment and we decided that the no use report in
american equipment we captured because we can use
it ourselves and equipment was very hard to get and
if we got american radio or or something that that
we could use we didn't report it being captured
because every time you reported something being
captured, somebody in Saigon on the Vietnamese
side of the house wanted you to turn it in so there's
something more that you've done. So we never
turned in anything that was American that we could
use. We just told them what we didn't want to have.
You couldn't keep any of the captured equipment
yourself, supposedly.
Again, talking about the training, was the U.S.
Army training Arvin in American tactics? or in
guerrilla warfare? The units that I were with, we
were training them as infantrymen, I would say
American standards, because I'd been a training
commander of units in the United States, and we
tailored the training to fighting in the jungle,
but most of the training that we were doing was, I
felt, the American way of doing things. Now, I'm
saying this because I was with an infantry
training unit. Now, there were other units in
Vietnam, American Ranger units, American
Special Forces, which were doing their style of
training with Vietnamese units. And sure, they
trained them as Rangers and guerrilla warfare and
what have you. But my people that we were training
were straight infantry, and we were training as
infantry. using a combination of firepower and
maneuver, and kind of tailored that to the
jungle-type warfare. Okay. What was the American
morale like at this time during Tet, throughout
the ranks?
Well, again, that's hard for me to say what the
overall American morale was, because Again, I was
only one of me and one sergeant, and he was a senior
sergeant. He was an E-8, which is the second
highest sergeant that you can have in the Army. And
our morale was good. We were very pleased with what
we were doing. We felt we were winning. I really
couldn't tell you what the morale of the other
American units, because we didn't get to see too
many American units in that time. I guess because
we had done real well. I feel that we'd done real
well pushing them out of Saigon and areas that the
morale must have been high. I never heard anybody
say it wasn't, but again, I didn't see it myself. It
was just me and the other Viennese. As far as I'm
concerned, our morale was high because we were
doing pretty good. Did Tet prove anything to you at
the time about the determination of the North
Vietnamese
Yeah, I felt that they really tried, the North
Vietnamese, really tried to put a black eye on the
American-South Vietnamese relationship, and I
think they really underestimated the will of the
South Vietnamese at that time.
I really felt that South Vietnamese and the
American unit And I say American units. We also had
over there other units from other countries. We
had the Korean White Horse Division, which was a
very strong division, and you had other countries
involved. I think they underestimated the
combined firepower of the Americans and other
Allied forces over there. I thought we were doing
real well in 1068. Okay.
Not specifically with your first tour or just
anything. Looking back at Vietnam, I'd like to see
if you could evaluate military personnel. Did you
ever feel the military was top-heavy in Vietnam?
Well,
when you talk about top-heavy, you're talking
about senior officers. I didn't feel that way.
I've heard stories about it, but again, here, what
I personally saw... We were generally short
personnel. I did notice, though, and you talk to
any infantry soldier on the ground, that if you had
a pretty good battle going on and you had a couple
battalions involved, you had a whole bunch of
helicopters flying around and you would have
either a battalion commander and division
commanders and a bunch of staff officers.
Everybody would want to go see what's going on. And
you would have more helicopters flying around of
higher ranking people watching the show. And
everybody's trying to give the infantry command
on the ground guidance on how to do it. And you
didn't lack for anybody telling you what they
thought when you had something going on. But I
wouldn't say it was top heavy, but you had so many
different groups over there. You had your
division people, and you had your staff people,
and you had regional people. I served in Korea
twice, not during time of war, and you had all
different types of groups over there, too. You had
your combined staff, and you had your American
staff, the United Nations staff. By the time you
get all these staffs, same thing in Vietnam, by the
time you had all these staffs of people, you had a
lot of people running around.
Recently, I read a book by Philip Caputo called The
Rumor of War. And he was talking about a problem
with fragging of officers, unexplained deaths.
Have you ever heard of evidence of that? Yeah. Not
my first tour. I wasn't with any Americans to speak
of. But my second time in 101st Airborne, they've
had that.
I think you might remember a Life magazine article
that came out where a West Point officer, for that
matter, had decided not to go on a mission because
they took a vote among the soldiers of that company
and decided they weren't going to go on a mission.
That's unheard of, not only a West Point officer,
but unheard of any officer that would take a vote in
a unit to find out they were going on a mission. The
military is democratic, but not that democratic.
But, yeah, I heard of it, I think, At that time, when
I was in 101st, there was a court-martial going on
where some soldier threw a grenade into one of his
company commander's tents. There was a lot of
drugs wrapped up into it, too. Drugs in Vietnam.
And I was over there the second time in 1970, in
101st Airborne. Drugs were pretty easy to get. The
North Vietnamese made available drugs at no cost.
The soldier wanted to get drugs and the commander
wasn't really checking it. It was awful hard. We
had urinalysis tests and everything else. Drugs
were readily available and if they wanted it, they
got it. It was awful hard to control. What impact do
you feel that the short rotation of command in
Vietnam, and the short tours that the men had, do
you feel like that had any impact on that? Yeah, I
did. I did the same thing. I had a year there and a
year back here, and I went back over for another
year. I really felt that the normal soldier,
meaning the privates and the specialists, and you
running out of tape? Yeah, privates and
specialists and the people that are actually
fighting. A year is a long time we fight out in the
trees. And they would try to pull them in every two
or three months and what have you and give them some
type of relax and recuperation. But we were having
commanders who were a commander or a staff officer
for six months, then go out and be a commander for
six months. and I didn't think that worked and I
think the military probably thought it didn't
work either because I think near the end they were
cutting that out but the
being a commander just for six months it's hard to
get your feet on the ground even in civilian life to
do something for six months and go do something
else for six months time you learn how to do it
you're gone and I felt in the officer wise on
different staff positions and command positions
If you're going to put him over there as commander,
put him over there for the full tour, not just six
months. But the soldier, the private on the
ground, I don't think he could take it for a year of
steady out in the jungle fighting. Some didn't.
Did you believe, as you hinted before, and like
Curtis LeMay of the Strategic Air Command, that
bombing escalation was the way to win the war?
Yeah, I felt that way. that if you got their
supplies from the Ho Chi Minh Trail and you took the
war home to their homeland, then you would win. We
did the same thing in World War II. We bombed
certain areas of Europe off the face of the earth.
I've been to them now, and you would never know it,
but areas like Mannheim, Germany, and Worms,
Germany, and Dusseldorf and a few of those places,
it was just leveled. I think we showed using the
atomic bomb, Nagasaki and Hiroshima, that when
you unleash that type of firepower, I'm not saying
we should have dropped the atomic bomb in Vietnam,
but you leash a lot of firepower on the enemy, they
may think twice about whether they want to
continue this.
How did the U.S. military plan to win the hearts and
minds of the people through destruction? Yeah.
When you think about that, we used to joke about it
somewhat, that how do you, just what you were
saying, how do you win the hearts and minds of the
people by killing them? When you brought in your
forces to attack certain areas in the South, and
that's what you were doing because you were
fighting the war in the South, if you had approval
from the South Vietnamese government or from the
regional area, to do bombing runs, and it happened
to be some friendly Vietnamese families in there,
you really don't win much when you blow them up. And
when you go into their homes and what have you and
burn them down, whether you might think they're,
or you've got reports that they were sympathizers
or not, and you cause this destruction, it was
awful hard to win the hearts and minds and some of
the things we did, but again here you had so many
problems of identifying who were the players.
Everybody looked alike, everybody wore the same
uniform to speak of. During the day this
individual you might know was a real top-notch
South Vietnamese supporter, a Nike, the Griller,
against you. You had children on the road that
would wave at you during the day and at night throw a
grenade in your vehicle. So it was awful hard to
identify the players. And any time you got a war,
some innocent people were going to get killed. I
find it interesting that you were an advisor with
an entire battalion with you. Did you ever have any
briefings, both in your first or maybe your second
term, on ways to We were sent to school prior to
going to Vietnam. The sergeant, who I didn't know
until I got over there, but he had attended special
courses that were conducted at Fort Benning,
Georgia. I went to a special officer's course at
Fort Benning. Because of things moving along,
they didn't teach us much how to speak the language
over there. We were given an interpreter. But I
lucked out. The individual I was advising spoke
very good English. So we got along very well. For
that matter, we would use the same
communications. In some cases, I'd get up in the
helicopter and talk to him back and forth on the
ground. And so we had no problems in
communication.
Yeah, I did go to school for about a month on how to go
in and how to try I don't know how much you know about
Orientals, but you can never tell them anything.
You cannot tell an Oriental to do anything and
expect it to be done. You have to talk to them. And I
speak from experience, since I have adopted two
Koreans. You can never tell them anything. You
have to make them think it's their idea. So yes, we
had some problems trying to win the hearts and
minds of the people. You try to do it with good
works. You had a lot of American civilians over
there that were from the State Department, what
have you, of coming in with different teams to
assist them in sanitation, to assist them in
agricultural. I worked in this battalion at
night. I worked on certain nights as an instructor
trying to teach the kids how to speak English.
getting funds to build schools for them. We were
receiving in from our American ships equipment,
and the ships had what's called dunnage aborted
boards and big two-by-fours and logging and what
have you that helped the ship keep the equipment in
one place as it was coming across, and they would
take all this stuff and throw it up on the dock. We
worked out a deal where we could pick some of this
stuff up and we'd build a school for them. I said, we
didn't build it. The sergeant and I didn't build
it. But we got the equipment. They picked it up.
They did the work. And all this was trying to help
them in the sanitation and the schooling and what
have you. And I thought it did some good. The people
that you got to know and the people that you worked
with, I felt we did real well with. But the people
that were on the borderline It was awful hard.
Sometimes they just were looking for a handout and
forget the rest of it. Um,
moving on to some other things, some other
aspects, um, do you feel Lyndon Johnson's refusal
to call on reserve troops to stay? You mean, um...
Later
in the year. I don't know. I don't know what
President Johnson had in mind. I don't know if we
could have done any more with any more troops over
there. We had so many people running around over
there now. I still fall back on the same thing that
you just said a few minutes ago about General May. I
thought General May was right in what he was trying
to say was carry the war. That's what it was. To the
north. through the American Air Force, and you can
have as many people as you want. You need to have as
many guns as you want, as many tanks as you want, but
as long as you stay fighting in one little area, it
could go on forever, which it did.
What would you like to say? No, that's good. Could
you please describe your second tour of duty,
specifically in Vietnam and Hawaii? Okay. The
second tour I had, I left Vietnam in 1968,
April of 1968, and I was reassigned that time to
Berlin, Germany, as a battalion executive
officer. and i served over there about a year and a
half of a three-year tour by the way and i got sent
back to vietnam that's the way it was going for us
infantry types you would stay about a year or so
somewhere and then go back again and the second
time i went back over and i have some background in
logistics and i had no idea what i was doing i was
just being sent back to vietnam again and when i got
into The center, where all the replacements come
in, they said, well, you're going up to the 101st
Airborne, which was located up around Hue,
Vietnam. Now, the 101st at that time had changed
over and became air mobile, which we were, for the
most part, with helicopters. You had some ground
crews, but for the most part, we were moving from
point A to point B by helicopters. Very few trucks.
So I went up there, and I found out that I was the
operation officer for the 101st Airborne
Division Support Command. Support Command means
just what it means, is that its responsibility was
not really the fighting of anything, but
supporting the soldiers, the battalions and
divisions that were out in the field carrying on
the war. My job as operation officer was twofold.
And this is where I got in this six-month deal. The
first six months, I was in charge of a forward
service support company, and I'll come back to
that and tell you about that. And the second six
months, I went back as the operation officer
itself for the division, the support command
operation. The first six months was something
like a company commander of a unit that was
assigned to one of the battalions, We had under us a
helicopter pad. We had a food storage facility. We
had water, fuel.
We had responsibility for coordination for all
air traffic of supplies for that battalion or
division, whatever they be. In my case, I was
assigned with a I had three battalions who were
taken care of. And whenever they went into combat
or normal everyday operation, we were
responsible for providing them the support. And
you'd go to staff meetings and find out what they
wanted and make sure that everything got from
point A to point B for them. I did that for six
months, and then I went back to our division
headquarters. The first six months was in a place
called Fubat, and it had a MASH hospital in that
area, and we were responsible for that. not not for
the dust off helicopters but just to make sure that
they had their supplies to get from point a to point
b when when the wounded were called or when they
called for helicopters for wounded we didn't do
anything in that area we just made sure that the
helicopters themselves got their fuel and all
that and the pilot had a place to live and so but
anyway uh the second six months i went back and
became a i say went back to this was a division
headquarters I was the operation officer for the
entire division, which was responsibility for
all these forward service support companies,
which were about four of them. And then we were also
responsible for some of the security for the Camp
Eagle, which was division headquarters. So in one
case, I was there out in the field doing the
commander of one of the small units, and then the
second time, or the the next six months I was in
charge of all these little outfits company
outfits to coordinate everybody's work and for
the most part I never really got involved in
anything like fighting like I got in the first time
I was dealing with the American units all the time
and we were always on the radio or on the phone or we
were making sure supplies got from point a to point
b and I didn't hardly even see any Vietnamese
soldiers, or we were just, I was so involved in
supplies and resupplying and what have you that I
could have been anywhere and not even know the war
was going on unless somebody was shooting at me,
because I was not really involved in the tactics
end of it. I was just involved in getting the
supplies to whoever wanted them.
I'm not certain if you could answer this, Do you
know what was responsible for the most casualties
by the Vietnamese attacks? What caused their
casualties? You mean the North Vietnamese
attacks on the Americans? Right.
Oh, no, I don't know any one single thing that
caused the most casualties. I know that they were A
lot of the American soldiers or the Vietnamese
have a, South Vietnamese had a weird feeling when
you start walking through the jungles because
they had different types of traps and what they
called pungy sticks which is a sharp stick with
poison on them of some sort and they had different
type of holes that you'd fall into and like cut you
in two with different type of steel wires and
whatever. I don't think there's any one thing that
you can say that killed more Americans or more
Vietnamese than anything else. It was a
combination of everything.
Were there ever any standing orders that you were
aware that when evacuating, when you did that?
where helicopters were refused to go? Or was it
just an individual basis in a combat situation
that you couldn't come to their relief, to take out
the relief? You're talking about American or
South Vietnamese? American. No, I've never heard
of any. I've known a lot of American and also South
Vietnamese helicopter pilots, and they were a
dedicated bunch. I've seen them go in or been told
about it or a known pilot that had gone in where they
were told not to go in because probably they would
not have got out. Or they've gone into places where
it was probably the chances of getting out was
almost nil when they got in and got back out again. I
think it was just the opposite. I don't know of any
officer that ever refused to go in and take anybody
out.